

	LITIGATION SUPPORT

These notes document some of the issues involves, and some of the techniques
and approaches that we've taken.

1 - SOURCE MATERIAL
The lawyers have provided the raw source material in the form of USB drives or sticks
containing folder structures, and files. We get an IT contact person who we can ask for 
clarification, but we have found that:

	(a) it is best to make it clear that we will work only with what we are given, and that 
	the technical details of retreiving the files and selection of which are handed to us is 
	purely their responsibility

	(b) if there is any question of deceit, holding back of relevant data, or simply lack of
	professioanlism in the collection of the data then this falls on the client

2 - PRESERVING METADATA
Care needs to be taken to not contaminate any metadata. This means avaoiding opening files in 
applications which might write data back, and to preserve the original "last modified date' when 
copying. As noted above, we are assuming good will and professionalism, so a "forensic" level of
rigor is not required.

3 - PROCESSING THE DATA
The core of the automated process is a search for matching text. For files in plain text this is 
simple, but for otheres they need to be first broken down. A variety of techniques and tools are 
used by our scripts, including:

	(a) Identifying contents with the Linux 'file' command. In many cases this provides too 
	much detail. As a rule the text before the first comma can be selected, so that "HTML 
	document, ISO-8859 text, with very long lines, with no line terminators" becomes simply
	"HTML document", but a script to identify all the filetypes is an important first step.

	(b) We can "burst" a Microsoft .PST file with the 'readpst' utility.

	(c) Any (most?) PDF documents can be converted to text with using the 'tesseract' OCR 
	package.

	(d) For propriatary formats we can often extract suitable text to search on using the 
	"strings" utility 
 
So, effectively we take the original data in \RAW, and create a version of this more suited to our 
searching under \WORKING - and then a final \RESULTS folder with data in the best form for the
client and the court. Only \RESULTS needs to be provided to the client, as \RAW should be exactly 
as provided by them - and \WORKING is setup purely for our convenince. 


4 - OUTPUT FORMAT
The format needs to be convenient for the client, the oppposing party and the judge. Generally this
is in the form of an Excel spreadsheet list of the documents, with columns of relevant fields such
as "To:" and "From:" and dates - and if possible a shortcut link to a viewable copy of the 
document. 

This may require that the original be output to a PDF - and this is acceptable as long as all 
relevant detail is included. (In the past, have had to be printed out).

Some difficult issues:

	(a) Email attachments are to be treated as documents in their own right, but the format
	in the spreadsheet needs to list them immediatly after the email "body", and ensure that 
	the link is clear.
	
	(b) Duplicates, of both documents and emails, are to be removed if possible. This means 
	that as long as one late email includes all the previous "thread" within it then the 
	earlier messages should be left out. Because any sender has the option of editing this 
	"previous history" text this is a dangerous judgement for us to make - so all matching 
	emails should be included regardless of duplicate thread history.

	(c) Document duplicates are rather simpler. Using md5sum we can easily create a unique 
	"hash" of each document, and a sorted list highlighting any duplicates

	(d) Again the client needs to make the decision on which duplicates to remove because, 
	in an extreme example, these same docement may be found at \plans\BEST.DOC, 
	\BILL\Secret\PLAN55.DOC and as an attachment to an email from Sue to Sam - under a 
	different name again.



  
